docs/database/README.md, before:

# Docker MCP Gateway Database

## Overview

The Docker MCP Gateway uses an embedded SQLite database to store configuration data, profiles (working sets), server catalogs, and migration status. The database is located at `~/.docker/mcp/mcp-toolkit.db` and is automatically created and migrated when the CLI first runs.

This document covers the database architecture, migration system, concurrent access handling, and troubleshooting.

## Architecture

### Database Location

```
~/.docker/mcp/
├── mcp-toolkit.db           # Main SQLite database
├── .mcp-toolkit-migration.lock  # Migration lock file (persists after creation)
```

### Database Schema

The database schema is managed through versioned migrations in `pkg/db/migrations/`

### Key Components

**Database Package** (`pkg/db/`)
   - DAO interface for all database operations
   - Migration management with golang-migrate
   - Connection pooling and configuration
   - File locking for concurrent access safety


## Migration System

### How Migrations Work

The Docker MCP Gateway uses [golang-migrate](https://github.com/golang-migrate/migrate) for schema versioning:

```
Application Startup
    ↓
pkg/db/New() called
    ↓
Check for pending migrations
    ↓
[Acquire File Lock] ← Prevents concurrent migrations
    ↓
Run migrations sequentially
    ↓
[Release File Lock]
    ↓
Database ready for use
```

### Migration Lock File

To prevent race conditions when multiple processes start simultaneously, migrations use an OS-level file lock:

- **Lock File**: `~/.docker/mcp/.mcp-toolkit-migration.lock`
- **Library**: `github.com/gofrs/flock` (cross-platform)
- **Persistence**: The lock file persists on disk after migrations complete (this is intentional and safe)

### Migration Operations

Migrations use both SQLite locks AND file locks:
- File lock prevents multiple processes from attempting migrations
- SQLite locks protect individual migration transactions
- This two-level locking ensures safety during initialization

### Why File Locking Is Necessary

Migrations with [golang-migrate](https://github.com/golang-migrate/migrate) are not run within a single transaction. There is the possibility
for a race condition if two process concurrently attempt to run the migrations.

**The Problem**: When multiple processes start simultaneously:
1. All check the database state (clean)
2. All try to run migrations at the same time
3. Race condition occurs → "Dirty database version" error

**The Solution**: OS-level file locking ensures only one process runs migrations at a time. Other processes wait, then see migrations already complete.


## Testing

### Concurrent Migration Test

Test that file locking prevents migration race conditions:

```bash
go run test_migration_race.go
```

This test launches 100 concurrent processes that all try to initialize the database simultaneously. With file locking, all 100 should succeed (100% success rate). Without file locking, most would fail with "Dirty database version" errors.

Commit message:

fix: error looking for database down migrations
This fixes the error where the database is ahead of the migrations,
but the migrations are not found. The issue occurs when the database is
migrated to a new version and then you use an older version of the the
application. The older version of references a db with a version that is
newer than the migrations it knows about.

The solution is to check the database version again the migration files
available. If the database is ahead of the migration we log a warning.

docs/database/README.md, after:

# Docker MCP Gateway Database

## Overview

The Docker MCP Gateway uses an embedded SQLite database to store configuration data, profiles (working sets), server catalogs, and migration status. The database is located at `~/.docker/mcp/mcp-toolkit.db` and is automatically created and migrated when the CLI first runs.

This document covers the database architecture, migration system, concurrent access handling, and troubleshooting.

## Architecture

### Database Location

```
~/.docker/mcp/
├── mcp-toolkit.db           # Main SQLite database
├── .mcp-toolkit-migration.lock  # Migration lock file (persists after creation)
```

### Database Schema

The database schema is managed through versioned migrations in `pkg/db/migrations/`

### Key Components

**Database Package** (`pkg/db/`)
   - DAO interface for all database operations
   - Migration management with golang-migrate
   - Connection pooling and configuration
   - File locking for concurrent access safety


## Migration System

### How Migrations Work

The Docker MCP Gateway uses [golang-migrate](https://github.com/golang-migrate/migrate) for schema versioning:

```
Application Startup
    ↓
pkg/db/New() called
    ↓
[Acquire File Lock] ← Prevents concurrent migrations
    ↓
Check current database version
    ↓
Database version > available migrations?
    ├─ Yes → Log warning, continue (database from newer version)
    └─ No  → Run pending migrations sequentially
    ↓
[Release File Lock]
    ↓
Database ready for use
```

### Migration Lock File

To prevent race conditions when multiple processes start simultaneously, migrations use an OS-level file lock:

- **Lock File**: `~/.docker/mcp/.mcp-toolkit-migration.lock`
- **Library**: `github.com/gofrs/flock` (cross-platform)
- **Persistence**: The lock file persists on disk after migrations complete (this is intentional and safe)

### Migration Operations

Migrations use both SQLite locks AND file locks:
- File lock prevents multiple processes from attempting migrations
- SQLite locks protect individual migration transactions
- This two-level locking ensures safety during initialization

### Why File Locking Is Necessary

Migrations with [golang-migrate](https://github.com/golang-migrate/migrate) are not run within a single transaction. There is the possibility
for a race condition if two process concurrently attempt to run the migrations.

**The Problem**: When multiple processes start simultaneously:
1. All check the database state (clean)
2. All try to run migrations at the same time
3. Race condition occurs → "Dirty database version" error

**The Solution**: OS-level file locking ensures only one process runs migrations at a time. Other processes wait, then see migrations already complete.

### Database Version Compatibility

#### Running Older Version After Newer Version

If you run an older version of the tool after having used a newer version, the database may be at a higher schema version than the older tool expects. In this case:

- The tool detects the database is ahead of available migrations
- A warning is logged once per process:
  ```
  Warning database version 8 (~/.docker/mcp/mcp-toolkit.db) is newer than expected. Upgrade to the newest version to prevent issues.
  ```

## Testing

### Concurrent Migration Test

Test that file locking prevents migration race conditions:

```bash
go run test_migration_race.go
```

This test launches 100 concurrent processes that all try to initialize the database simultaneously. With file locking, all 100 should succeed (100% success rate). Without file locking, most would fail with "Dirty database version" errors.
