docs/mcp-gateway.md, before:

# Docker MCP Gateway

Running MCP Servers in Docker Containers is robust and secure. 

See [Why running MCP Servers in Container is more secure](security.md)

## How to run the MCP Gateway?

Start up an MCP Gateway. This can be used for one client, or to service multiple clients if using either `sse` or `streaming` transports.

```bash
# Run the MCP gateway (stdio)
docker mcp gateway run

# Run the MCP gateway (streaming)
docker mcp gateway run --port 8080 --transport streaming

# Run with specific servers only, and select all tools from server1 and just tool2 from server2
docker mcp gateway run --servers server1,server2 --tools server1:* --tools server2:tool2

# Run a fallback secret lookup - lookup desktop secret first and the fallback to a local .env file
docker mcp gateway run --secrets=docker-desktop:./.env

# Run with verbose logging
docker mcp gateway run --verbose --log-calls

# Run in watch mode (auto-reload on config changes)
docker mcp gateway run --watch

# Run a standalone dockerized MCP server (no catalog required)
docker mcp gateway run --server docker.io/namespace/repository:latest
```

## How to connect to an MCP Client?

A typical usage looks like this Claude Desktop configuration:

```
{
    "mcpServers": {
        "MCP_DOCKER": {
            "command": "docker",
            "args": ["mcp", "gateway", "run"]
        }
    }
}
```

## How to run the MCP Gateway with Docker Compose?

The simplest way to tun the MCP Gateway with Docker Compose is with this kind of compose file:

```
services:
  gateway:
    image: docker/mcp-gateway
    command:
      - --servers=duckduckgo
    volumes:
      - /var/run/docker.sock:/var/run/docker.sock
```

### What does it do?

+ Starts an MCP Gateway for other services to use. Think AI Agents.
+ Work independently from Docker Desktop's MCP Toolkit. It can run anywhere there's a Docker engine.
+ Defines the list of enabled servers from the gateway's command line, with `--server`
+ Uses the online Docker MCP Catalog (v2: http://desktop.docker.com/mcp/catalog/v2/catalog.yaml by default, v3: http://desktop.docker.com/mcp/catalog/v3/catalog.yaml when `mcp-oauth-dcr` feature is enabled).

### How to run

```console
docker compose up
```

## More examples

See [Examples](examples/README.md)

## Complete set of command line flags

```
Docker MCP Toolkit's CLI - Manage your MCP servers and clients.

Usage: docker mcp gateway run

Flags:
      --block-network             Block tools from accessing forbidden network resources
      --block-secrets             Block secrets from being/received sent to/from tools (default true)
      --catalog string            path to the docker-mcp.yaml catalog (absolute or relative to ~/.docker/mcp/catalogs/) (default "docker-mcp.yaml")
      --config string             path to the config.yaml (absolute or relative to ~/.docker/mcp/) (default "config.yaml")
      --cpus int                  CPUs allocated to each MCP Server (default is 1) (default 1)
      --dry-run                   Start the gateway but do not listen for connections (useful for testing the configuration)
      --interceptor stringArray   List of interceptors to use (format: when:type:path, e.g. 'before:exec:/bin/path')
      --keep                      Keep stopped containers
      --log-calls                 Log calls to the tools (default true)
      --memory string             Memory allocated to each MCP Server (default is 2Gb) (default "2Gb")
      --port int                  TCP port to listen on (default is to listen on stdio)
      --registry string           path to the registry.yaml (absolute or relative to ~/.docker/mcp/) (default "registry.yaml")
      --secrets docker-desktop    colon separated paths to search for secrets. Can be docker-desktop or a path to a .env file (default to using Docker Deskop's secrets API) (default "docker-desktop")
      --servers strings           names of the servers to enable (if non empty, ignore --registry flag)
      --tools strings             List of tools to enable
      --transport string          stdio, sse or streaming (default is stdio) (default "stdio")
      --verbose                   Verbose output
      --verify-signatures         Verify signatures of the server images
      --watch                     Watch for changes and reconfigure the gateway (default true)
```

## Troubleshooting

Look at our [Troubleshooting Guide](/docs/troubleshooting.md)

Commit message:

Add basic working set support (#204)
* Add workingset types and config read/write.

* Add test commands

* Use a sqlite database for working sets. Add import/export commands.

* Vendor modules.

* Refactor oci things to make it reusable.

* Some small refactoring.

* New working set commands: push, pull, show, ls

* Add json and yaml for list formats.

* Add create command. Use constant version for working set.

* Fix push.

* Bare bones gateway with working sets.

* add working set to client connect.

* Add command to remove workingset (#199)

* Alias remove to rm.

* Better message when working set list is empty.

* Add message after importing or exporting working set.

* Add working sets feature flag.

* Add validation to working sets.

* vendor modules.

* Clean up todos.

* Hide client connect working set behind feature.

* Add docs for working sets.

* Fixes after merging main.

* Update docs.

* Fix most lint errors.

* Fix lint errors.

* CR feedback.

---------

Co-authored-by: Bobby <robert.house@docker.com>

docs/mcp-gateway.md, after:

# Docker MCP Gateway

Running MCP Servers in Docker Containers is robust and secure. 

See [Why running MCP Servers in Container is more secure](security.md)

## How to run the MCP Gateway?

Start up an MCP Gateway. This can be used for one client, or to service multiple clients if using either `sse` or `streaming` transports.

```bash
# Run the MCP gateway (stdio)
docker mcp gateway run

# Run the MCP gateway (streaming)
docker mcp gateway run --port 8080 --transport streaming

# Run with specific servers only, and select all tools from server1 and just tool2 from server2
docker mcp gateway run --servers server1,server2 --tools server1:* --tools server2:tool2

# Run a fallback secret lookup - lookup desktop secret first and the fallback to a local .env file
docker mcp gateway run --secrets=docker-desktop:./.env

# Run with verbose logging
docker mcp gateway run --verbose --log-calls

# Run in watch mode (auto-reload on config changes)
docker mcp gateway run --watch

# Run a standalone dockerized MCP server (no catalog required)
docker mcp gateway run --server docker.io/namespace/repository:latest

# Run with a working set (requires working-sets feature to be enabled)
docker mcp gateway run --working-set my-working-set
```

See [Working Sets](working-sets.md) for more information about organizing servers into reusable collections.

## How to connect to an MCP Client?

A typical usage looks like this Claude Desktop configuration:

```
{
    "mcpServers": {
        "MCP_DOCKER": {
            "command": "docker",
            "args": ["mcp", "gateway", "run"]
        }
    }
}
```

## How to run the MCP Gateway with Docker Compose?

The simplest way to tun the MCP Gateway with Docker Compose is with this kind of compose file:

```
services:
  gateway:
    image: docker/mcp-gateway
    command:
      - --servers=duckduckgo
    volumes:
      - /var/run/docker.sock:/var/run/docker.sock
```

### What does it do?

+ Starts an MCP Gateway for other services to use. Think AI Agents.
+ Work independently from Docker Desktop's MCP Toolkit. It can run anywhere there's a Docker engine.
+ Defines the list of enabled servers from the gateway's command line, with `--server`
+ Uses the online Docker MCP Catalog (v2: http://desktop.docker.com/mcp/catalog/v2/catalog.yaml by default, v3: http://desktop.docker.com/mcp/catalog/v3/catalog.yaml when `mcp-oauth-dcr` feature is enabled).

### How to run

```console
docker compose up
```

## More examples

See [Examples](examples/README.md)

## Complete set of command line flags

```
Docker MCP Toolkit's CLI - Manage your MCP servers and clients.

Usage: docker mcp gateway run

Flags:
      --block-network             Block tools from accessing forbidden network resources
      --block-secrets             Block secrets from being/received sent to/from tools (default true)
      --catalog string            path to the docker-mcp.yaml catalog (absolute or relative to ~/.docker/mcp/catalogs/) (default "docker-mcp.yaml")
      --config string             path to the config.yaml (absolute or relative to ~/.docker/mcp/) (default "config.yaml")
      --cpus int                  CPUs allocated to each MCP Server (default is 1) (default 1)
      --dry-run                   Start the gateway but do not listen for connections (useful for testing the configuration)
      --interceptor stringArray   List of interceptors to use (format: when:type:path, e.g. 'before:exec:/bin/path')
      --keep                      Keep stopped containers
      --log-calls                 Log calls to the tools (default true)
      --memory string             Memory allocated to each MCP Server (default is 2Gb) (default "2Gb")
      --port int                  TCP port to listen on (default is to listen on stdio)
      --registry string           path to the registry.yaml (absolute or relative to ~/.docker/mcp/) (default "registry.yaml")
      --secrets docker-desktop    colon separated paths to search for secrets. Can be docker-desktop or a path to a .env file (default to using Docker Deskop's secrets API) (default "docker-desktop")
      --servers strings           names of the servers to enable (if non empty, ignore --registry flag)
      --tools strings             List of tools to enable
      --transport string          stdio, sse or streaming (default is stdio) (default "stdio")
      --verbose                   Verbose output
      --verify-signatures         Verify signatures of the server images
      --watch                     Watch for changes and reconfigure the gateway (default true)
      --working-set string        Working set ID to use (requires working-sets feature, mutually exclusive with --servers and --enable-all-servers)
```

**Note:** The `--working-set` flag is only available when the `working-sets` feature is enabled via `docker mcp feature enable working-sets`.

## Troubleshooting

Look at our [Troubleshooting Guide](/docs/troubleshooting.md)
